---
created: 2009-03-17, 04:03
layout: post
license: Public Domain
type: Feature
---

=========
About Tav
=========

A Brief History of Tav
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:Abstract:

    I'm Tav, a 29 year old from London. I enjoy working on large-scale social,
    economic and technological systems and have been pursuing the Espian vision
    since starting my first company 11 years ago.

    This is a draft, pseudo auto-biography written in a simple Q&A style. Enjoy!

.. contents::   Table of Contents
                :depth: 2
                :backlinks: none


Are you happy to answer personal questions?
===========================================

.. class:: sidebox

  "Transparency is fundamental to trust"

Yes. I have nothing to hide and believe that transparency is fundamental to
trust. Because it lets others understand where you are coming from and your
motives are made clear.

The personal stuff is what matters. It's what drives people. What affects their
thoughts. Their actions. One might give reasoning for actions, but it is all
driven by something very personal.

For example, there was a time when I took a closed approach. Why? Not because I
believed in it. But because I was pissed off. Pissed off at an ex-collaborator
with whom I had disagreements of strategy. I didn't want him to benefit from my
work if he didn't believe in it.

There was another time when I couldn't focus on my work for months. I was heart
broken. When people mention heartache they fail to mention that it's not just a
metaphor, your heart really aches!

Feeling connected. Falling in love. Being loved back. Not being loved back.
Being warm and safe. The story of the heart defines us. And to be useful to
society it is paramount that we first understand ourselves. Then by sharing, we
let others do so too.


Who are you?
============

Entrepreneur. Musician. Engineer. Designer. Economist. Scientist. Architect.
Inventor. Activist. Producer. Hacker. Poet. Spiritual leader. Anthropologist.
Writer. I am none of these. Yet I find myself playing with a curious mix of it
all. Symbiotic engineering.


What's your name?
=================

Tav.


No, really, what's your name?
=============================

It's just Tav. No surname. Like Madonna if you will. If you mean what's the name
on my birth certificate, then it's Vageesan Sivapathasundaram. As you can
probably imagine, many school exams were finished by the time I managed to fill
in my name.

When my father kicked me out of the house he demanded that I never use his name.
What he meant was that I shouldn't use his name to ask for help from other
people.

.. class:: sidebox

  "Being homeless at 17 gives you a certain outlook"

But being made homeless at 17 gives you a certain outlook. Having to sleep in a
wet park doesn't endear you to the guy responsible. So I decided to take his
wish rather literally and just abandoned my surname. Gave myself the name 'Tav'
-- a shortened form of an internet handle I'd been using, ta'veren:

  "A person around whom the Wheel of Time weaves all surrounding life-threads,
  perhaps all life-threads, to form a Web of Destiny" [Jordan-1990]_.

I quite liked it because the meaning was rather similar to my birth name,
Vageesan, which also means: creator, lord of knowledge, lord of speech, &c.

And as I would later find out from an excited Kabbalist at a party sometime, Tav
is also a letter of the Hebrew alphabet. It supposedly stands for truth
[Ginsburgh]_ and represents the covenant between God and his people. Or maybe it
just means a box.


Who is Tav Ino/Espian?
======================

`Saritah <http://www.saritah.com/>`_, an old housemate of mine, used to call me
"Tavino". So when sign-up forms insist on a surname, I give them "Ino". It's not
a part of my name. Just there to sate the surname requirements of silly
websites.

Likewise with "Tav Espian".


Do you suffer from schizophrenia?
=================================

Nope. At least no more than average. For example, when I was about 8, I used to
have 3 imaginary friends who controlled the various forces of life. Sadly I
haven't seen them since hitting puberty.

I did once conduct a related experiment though -- spent a few months living
multiple lives in parallel. I had keys to a number of different houses.
Introduced different aspects of myself under different names. Isolated my
behaviours into distinct characters.

.. class:: sidebox

  "A gentle soul with a love for humanity"

This experiment -- whilst it nearly pushed me over into insanity -- helped me
realise my true self. Because in all the personalities I took, a certain
commonality was inescapable. A gentle soul with a love for humanity.

"If a man comes to the door of poetry untouched by the madness of the Muses,
believing that technique alone will make him a good poet, he and his sane
compositions never reach perfection, but are utterly eclipsed by the
performances of the inspired madman" -- Socrates.


When is your birthday?
======================

18th March 1982.


Where were you born?
====================

In North Middlesex Hospital, Enfield, London, UK.


Where have you lived?
=====================

In London (UK) for most of my life:

* Enfield
* Greenwich
* Plumstead
* Tooting
* Bickley
* Bromley
* Beckenham
* Orpington
* Hackney
* Finsbury Park
* Sudbury Hill
* Angel
* Liverpool Street
* Brixton

With some temporary stay in:

* Richmond
* Notting Hill
* Swiss Cottage

In Sri Lanka for 3 years:

* Kilinochi

In Tamil Nadu (India) for 2 years:

* Thirunelveli
* Chennai

In Berlin (Germany) for a year:

* Wedding
* Prenzlauer Berg


Have you had a privileged upbringing?
=====================================

I've had a mixed upbringing. Growing up on a farm/jungle in Sri Lanka. Being a
city boy in London. The quality of life I had growing up was reflective of the
ups and downs in my father's life.

He would be unemployed at times and we would live in shitholes. He would also
make more than £100k a year sometimes and we would live decently. Ups and downs.

I consider myself rather privileged to have had private schooling at Dulwich
College. But this was only possible because of a scholarship and an assisted
place. I appreciate it moreso because I've been at state schools and realise how
shit they can be.

.. class:: sidebox

  "Thankful for the various opportunities life has given me"

But I am even more thankful for the various opportunities life has given me. To
have grown up under the influences of two different cultures. To have been born
and brought up in London -- in some ways, the centre of the world. To have
experienced poverty and excess.

To have experienced death at an early age and thus been able to question the
meaning of life. To have a loving mother. To have a cruel father. To not being
incapacitated in some form. To have decent-enough looks. The Universe has been
good to me.

And even the suffering I've experienced has been beneficial -- a real education
in the School of Life.


Where did you go to school?
===========================

I started at Heronsgate primary school in Greenwich. Then home schooled by my
mother whilst living in India for 2 years before joining Broadwater primary
school in Tooting. I also briefly attended Graveney's 6th form for A-level Math
classes before joining Dulwich College in 1992.

I dropped out of Dulwich in early 2000 after Leeds University gave me an
unconditional offer to do a degree in Philosophy and Economics. Unfortunately,
whilst I accepted the offer, I never bothered to turn up. Sorry Leeds!


What academic qualifications do you have?
=========================================

Nothing really. Unless you count GCSEs and A-levels -- The Autodidactic School
of Polymathy doesn't give out certifications yet.

I did 2 of my 12 GCSEs early at the age of 9 -- in Mathematics and Tamil. Did
the others at the usual age of 16. Got an A grade in all of them.

Did 8 A-levels in: Maths, Ancient History (AS), General Studies, Further Maths,
French (AS), Physic, Chemistry and English. Got the grades AAABBNUX
respectively. The last three were because I didn't bother turning up to the
exams after I got the unconditional offer for university.

I also did my SATs for entrance to US universities and think I got a perfect
score -- maybe that was only in the Maths. My memory is sketchy on that one. Got
fazed out when I realised that I couldn't afford the yearly 30k+ that
MIT/Harvard wanted.

.. class:: sidebox

  "Lost interest in academia by my mid-teens"

My childhood aspirations to do a PhD by the time I was 18 were gone as I lost
interest in academia by my mid-teens. Academic qualifications seemed to simply
be an exercise in memory rather than understanding.

An example would be my Ancient Hsistory exam. I hadn't attended classes, so my
teachers predicted a D grade. The day before the exam I read a book on the
topic. So when the results arrived and I'd gotten an A grade, the Classics
department was rather surprised. Nothing more than short-term memory in action.

And whilst I've never experienced university, people often tell me it's
different. This, however, doesn't correlate with my experiences as a teacher. I
used to privately tutor undergraudate computer science students in my early
twenties. And their university education seemed to be just as focused on memory
and not on understanding.


What languages do you know?
===========================

.. class:: sidebox

  "Lucky to be bilingual"

Despite my fantasies of being a polyglot, I am only fluent in two: English and
Tamil. I am familiar with some very basic French and German. A certificate
somewhere states that I should know some Japanese but I don't (at least not
anymore).

The most fun I ever had learning a language so far has been Hindi. I was 14 and
on holiday in South India for 3 months and convinced a North Indian gentleman to
teach me for a mere £30.

The deal was that I could turn up at his house any time during the day and he
would teach me. It turned out that he was just newly wed, and observing the
flirting of adults was an interesting side-experience to the learning of Hindi
and Sanskrit.

Unfortunately, like with Sinhalese and Latin, I can remember very little and
will be surprised if I recognised even a few letters from the written script
(Devanagari).

At some point though, I'd like to learn these languages properly -- along with
Russian, Chinese (Mandarin), Arabic, Greek and Spanish. I consider myself very
lucky to be bilingual. If you have kids, teach them many languages before they
reach the age of 5. It really helps.


What inspired the Espian vision?
================================

The death of my grandmother [Palmer-2004]_. To understand this, you need to go
back to the start of my life. 25 days old. Beginning my jetset lifestyle. My
mother and I were on the way to Sri Lanka.

Her father was dying back home. Lung cancer. When he passed away two months
later, my grandmother was left all alone. So my mother decided to leave me there
with her and returned to England.

And that is how I spent my first years growing up. Thinking that my grandmother
was my mother. My mother eventually came back for me. And I met my parents for
the first time a few months before my fourth birthday.

A year and a bit later, I had a little sister and we were about to emigrate to
the USA. My father was going to Berkeley. But news came that my grandmother had
fallen ill whilst visiting friends and family in India. Bone cancer.

I was rather adamant that we go to India. At least for me to go. Eventually my
mother, sister and I went to India. My grandmother had her leg amputated. The
cancer had stopped spreading. I nursed her back to health.

But then on October 20th 1988, she had a heart attack. My mother had been out
shopping. I called for help from the neighbours. I prayed to the God of Death to
spare her. But to no avail. Blood dripped from her nose. Her body was ice cold.

As the eldest grandson, I had to alight her funeral pyre. I refused. I wanted to
freeze her and preserve her until death could be reversed. You have to do this
everyone said. So I did.

A few days later I snapped. I was 6. This was my first experience of death. I
had grown up under shell attacks in Sri Lanka and seen bloodied, mutilated war
victims, but had never seen death directly. I couldn't understand why we lived.
What is the point of life if all that you get at the end is death?

The family across the road were Christian. I asked them. I asked their priest.
The neighbours to the right were Muslim. I asked them. I asked their imam. I
asked the Jains. The Saivas. The Hindus. The Sikhs. The Buddhists.

I got similar answers. But none were satisfactory. Made me realise that there is
very little difference in the real teachings of the various faiths. But I still
didn't have an answer.

I wanted to go meditate in the mountains. Maybe I'll reach enlightenment like
Buddha. Wander the wilderness like Jesus. My parents talked me out of this. So I
kept on asking questions of any adult that would give me their time.

Eventually I came to the conclusion that life has no meaning. There is no
ultimate truth or purpose. God lies within. And the only worthy goal in life is
to be happy in the moment.

But then I looked around. We were living in a village in southern India. During
the time following my grandma's death, the narcissicism of childhood had been
replaced by an awareness of the world.

And everywhere I looked I saw needless suffering. I compared the life in India
to life in England. The differences in the material quality of life. The
wastefulness and excess where others barely survived. The differences in the
spiritual quality of life. How, despite not having much, the poor seemed
happier.

I was also able to see politicians in action. The ideals of democracy thrown
aside as people were bribed into voting for specific parties. I tried to
understand why people would destroy the chances of a collective better future
for a slightly better today.

Eventually I came to the realisation that one's basic needs need to be met.
One's family to not be starving. Otherwise people were willing to screw each
other over for short term gain.

And if I were to be happy in my life and not be screwed over by others then I
needed to ensure that others had their needs taken care of. And if everyone had
the potential to be happy, then I could be happy.

And thus I discovered my life purpose. By adopting the entire world as my
family. The Espian vision was born.


How do you get your ideas?
==========================

Most of my ideas are informed and inspired from experiences that life puts me
through. And, quite often, they reach clarity as I am mid-speech discussing such
situations. One example I'll elaborate here is Pedipeace.

It was inspired by events that took place during a March 2003 protest as War
started in Iraq. As I was heading out to join some friends from school, I
couldn't find my belt. There was a corded PC microphone on the table. I tried it
out as a belt. It worked, but it looked rather silly so I took it off.

I caught up with my friends at Westminter. One of them had just been to Morocco.
He had a present for me. A djellaba. I wore the robe over my t-shirt. A few
hours later I had been adorned further.

.. image:: http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.henry-21st-birthday.jpg
           :class: float-right-aligned
           :width: 302
           :height: 204

My scarf was being used as a bandana to hold together a wreath of daffodils
adorning my head. I was carrying a big stick -- the leftovers of an anti-war
placard. I had used it earlier to make some music on some traffic cones and beer
bottles.

The protest continued as usual. The BBC interviewed me for looking strange. All
in all, it had been a lovely afternoon walk with friends. Except for the
shouting of "No War" constantly, it demonstrated how lovely London would be if
it was pedestrianised.

...


What's the story of the Wobbly Bridge?
======================================

Time. 2am. Place. The wobbly (millennium) bridge.

After entertaining myself running around the trees, I pull myself up onto the
wobbly bridge and gently skip along. My heart beats slightly faster as I see the
river flow underneath me. The thrill of being so high. The thrill of falling.

Clumsily pull myself over the side, straddle a beam and sit. Watch the river
flow. I lean back. Feel the aura of the full moon. The wind blows. So soft. But
with a sharpness that makes me alert. Aware. Lyrics come to mind "London calling
to the underworld... I live by the river!"

I get up to climb back over. I almost slip. Heart beats. Back on the wobbly.
Start to skip along again. In front of me, a giant circle. A perfect circle. A
circle of objects. I look around -- no-one to be seen. A present from an
anonymous stranger.

I delight in the find and start exploring. A mobile phone. A paintbrush. A block
of wood. A pressure valve. A blue tin (labelled russian caviar). I look inside.
Some round stones. Another block of wood. Too many objects to be mentioned here.
The wind takes on a cold edge, but the present makes me very warm.

And in the middle of this perfect circle, at the exact middle of the bridge
(both lengthways and sideways), a grey and white toy bunny with a fat blue
alkaline battery. I ponder upon the present for a long time. Is there a clever
message?

For some reason, the words "beautiful girl lovely dress" sample across my mind's
ear. A cyclist zooms by. I call back at him. He stops. He turns. He approaches
cautiously. I ask him what he thinks. Maybe a clock he says. Doesn't have
anything interesting to say. I let him go.

I explore the present further. Time goes by. I feel inspired. Thoughts provoked.
Another walks by. I wave. We speak. I can sense the samani in this creature. We
will be good friends.

I bid the present goodbye, and decide to spend the remaining hours of the
morning exploring the mind of this new found friend. And fun hours they were.


What are your deepest values?
=============================

.. class:: sidebox

  "Truth, justice, honour, loyalty and love"

Truth, justice, honour, loyalty and love. Sure, they might be based on the Code
of Thundera, but they are my deepest values. And whilst I occasionally slip up,
I constantly strive to abide by them. This constant struggle is what makes life
interesting.

And, although not a value, another major driving force of my life is best
described in `Fight Club <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0137523/>`_: "This is your
life and it is ending one minute at a time". That is, life is short and one
should make the best of it. Carpe diem!


Have you ever lied?
===================

Yes, a handful of times. I'm also terrible at lying -- you can see it from a
mile off!

I do however have two habits which are far from my self-image as a Speaker of
Truth. One is that I occasionally pretend to be ignorant and ask others to
explain things to me. This can be useful to both get a feel for what the other
person actually understands as well as a way to stroke their egos.

I don't actually see an issue with this -- as far as I can see it is beneficial
social lubrication. However I did once hear about Tony Blair getting lambasted
for similar behaviour, so perhaps there is something sinister that I am missing?

The other habit of mine is related to what my old business partner Ade Thomas
from green.tv refers to as "concentric circles of bullshit". It could probably
be best understood by looking at how `green.tv <http://www.green.tv/>`_ came
into existence.

It started with the idea being pitched to UNEP, Greenpeace and a few others.
This was before YouTube had become mainstream and they didn't really see the
value of an online video channel dedicated to environmental issues. Or had even
heard of podcasts.

They weren't happy to provide any resources, but were okay enough for their
names to be used as partners. This was all it took for the concentric circles of
bullshit to go into action!

It became easier to go round to a number of other organisations and say, "Hey,
UNEP and Greenpeace are backing us, would you like to come on board?". A Paragon
of Truth would never have been happy with such half-truths but it proved
effective.

By the time of launch, the circle had come back to the original parties who were
now willing to provide a lot of support since so many others were on board!

One of the Directors of UNEP was even willing to claim to have been the
visionary behind the idea in the first place and was more than happy to parade
the accomplishment in front of other UN agencies.

Now it worked out really well for everyone involved in green.tv, but playing
with such half-truths can sometimes have painful consequences. However, such
hustling is unfortunately a necessary trait sometimes when building businesses.
If anyone can tell me how to achieve the same results without it, I'd be happy
to learn.


Have you ever stolen anything?
==============================

Sadly, yes. Five times.

The first time, I stole 50p from my mother's coat pocket. I was 9 and wanted to
buy some cola bottles (they used to be just 1p each back then!). I felt guilty
about this for weeks after and eventually confessed.

The second time, I helped some fellow homeless people pick up scraps of metal
from a construction site. The metal got sold at a dodgy garage somewhere and
paid for a warm night and a drink. Sorry construction company!

The third time, I had done some work for a guy. Did it exactly as he wanted. But
he claimed it wasn't and refused to pay up. So I convinced him to give me the
money as a loan and have sadly yet to repay it. Sorry John!

I shop-lifted some food from Tesco once when I was one of the billion odd living
on less than $2 a day. So I paid for some of the items and walked out with
several more in the bag.

The final time, I stole a passport sized photo of an ex-girlfriend after we
split up. This is my confession.


Have you ever been disloyal?
============================

Sadly, twice. Once for real and the other time in my head. Both, unsurprisingly,
involved women.

The first time, a friend asked if his ex could stay at my place -- they were
going through a separation. Things went great for a while. She was extremely
lovely and I enjoyed having her around the place.

But once she started making advances, my value system was challenged. Torn
between my loyalty to my friend and my attraction to her, I am sorry to say that
I ended up giving in and we ended up having a fling.

The second time, a friend and his girl of many years had broken up. It so
happened that she was also the sister of another friend of mine. And so we ended
up spending a fair bit of time together.

During this time I gradually fell for her. Thankfully I am pleased to say that I
never acted on my feelings for her, but I am still not proud of having had those
feelings in the first place.

Loyalty is very important to me and I am truly sorry for having let down my
friends on those two occasions.


Are you a bigot?
================

.. class:: sidebox

  "Much to be gained in life when one keeps an open mind"

Whilst I have no compunctions about political incorrectness and will tease the
French and the Obese, I am not a bigot. It is hard to be so when you grow up in
a truly diverse city like London.

As a further testament, my various lovers have come from a variety of religious
and national backgrounds -- Bolivia, England, Germany, Greece, India, Lithuania,
New Zealand, Singapore, St. Lucia, Vietnam...

Ditto with my various flatmates/colleagues -- Australia, Austria, Brazil,
Canada, China, France, Gambia, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, USA, &c.

In contrast my dear father is a homophobic racist. In fact, I would go as far to
say that, in general, immigrants tend to be more bigoted than "natives". Whilst
unjustifiable, this is in some ways understandable -- a reflection of their
insecurity and vulnerability.

It's when it gets passed down to their children that I have a problem with it.
For example, I was at my sister's 21st birthday. It was at a club down near
Soho. And I was rather shocked as I walked in.

Why? Because with the exception of about 5 people, everyone else there was
brown. Not that I'm complaining. Asian girls -- like their South American
counterparts -- tend to be rather pleasant on the eyes.

But when many of these people were speaking to each other in Gujarati, Tamil,
Hindi, &c., I began to wonder. And after speaking to a few of them, my doubts
were confirmed. Most of these people rarely mixed with people outside of these
groups.

Now, being part of an ethnic community is not a bad thing. I would say it's a
great thing. But doing so to the exclusion of mixing with other groups is
definitely harmful. Especially in the context of London where you have so much
opportunity and no excuse.

Why? Because mixing with the same type of people doesn't help to broaden your
mind. You need to be exposed to unfamiliar and sometimes uncomfortable
perspectives. That's essential to nurturing a healthy understanding of the world
around you.

Some people might misinterpret this as being racist to my "own kind". I've even
been called coconut twice -- brown on the outside, white on the inside. I'm
neither white nor brown. I'm a multi-coloured kaleidoscope. A human being. An
Espian.

I want to get past the useless social ghettos that repeatedly form. These serve
no purpose except to create needless boundaries between otherwise loving beings.
And, whilst rare, I've experienced bigotry from "natives" too.

The most surreal one was a pub in east London. I had popped in whilst waiting
for a girlfriend. It was eerily filled with just white people. Even posh venues
have a token coloured individual.

All eyes turned to me as I put my coat down and approached the bar. One of the
barmaids intersected me and escorted me to the door. They were closing. Right.
Now, again, I have nothing with people mixing with their "own". Just don't do it
exclusively! Say no to social ghettos.

Anyways, seeing the bigotry of others whilst growing up had been a good enough
lesson in the pointlessness of it. There is so much to be gained in life when
one keeps an open mind.

One advice I'd like to share is to not suspect bigotry of others. My father
would interpret any insult or rejection as racial discrimination. My gay friends
would express gay pride a bit too much to overcompensate for the oppression they
felt others had towards them.

Sure, racism and oppression exist. There is a bigot on every street. But don't
live in fear of it. Don't suspect it. Just be yourself. And if that is a true
being with good intentions, others will sense that and react positively. No
matter what.

As for the few that don't. So what? They are probably old and set in their ways.
They will die off soon enough. Oh, that reminds me of another thing. Political
fucking correctness.

I was on a train once. Befriended this guy sitting in the same carriage. We'd
been having an hour long conversation when I asked him how life was as a
cripple. He went berserk.

Now I hadn't meant to insult him in any way. That should have been clear from
the tone of my voice. And he was a cripple. At least by any dictionary
definition that I've seen. But, no. He was a disabled something or other.

What the fuck? It seems to me that some people deal with their shortcomings by
hiding it behind fancy politically correct phrases. No, I'm not blind. I'm just
visually impaired. What the fuck? Deal with reality. Shit happens. Just be
yourself.


Are you gay?
============

No. However I have had two experiences relating to the issue. They took place
just over a decade apart and what surprises me is how similar both scenarios
were.

The first took place when I was 16. We were staying over at a family friend's
house in India and sometime in the early hours of one morning I woke to find one
of their sons sucking my cock.

My initial thought was to respond with physical violence, but given the matter
of his teeth around my most delicate part, I instead controlled myself, withdrew
Mister Helmet from his grasp and explained my lack of interest.

He took the rejection fairly well and went away. To this day I have no idea why
he thought such behaviour would be okay. What baffles me even more is that a
similar incident took place 10 years later!

This time it was a friend that I'd made at a party a few weeks prior. I had
liked his energy and invited him to one of my house parties. He had ended up
crashing in my room towards the end of the party.

It was not uncommon to go back to my room after a party and find people passed
out. So I got into my bed and went to sleep. I gradually woke up a little while
later to find him giving me a blowjob.

I couldn't believe that this was happening again. And perhaps because I was
still drunk or perhaps because earlier that day I'd had a break up with two of
the girls that I'd loved, but by that point I really didn't care.

So, this time, I let the guy suck me off. At one point he even moved around
wanting me to reciprocate -- I pushed him away and he seemed to get the hint.
And once I'd ejaculated, he put his clothes back on and left.

Now, when I have recounted what had happened to others, some have suggested that
I might therefore have bi-tendencies. Whilst this might be true, I have never
fantasised about having sex with a guy or been turned on by it, so I fail to see
how.

In fact, on that particular night, it really didn't matter that it was a guy. It
could have just as well have been a `Fleshlight sex toy
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fleshlight>`_ for all I cared. Pure physical
release and nothing more.

So there you go. I am certainly not homophobic but I have no desire for romantic
or sexual relationships with guys either.


Are you violent?
================

If you ask everyone who knows me, they will attest that I am one of the calmest
people you'll ever meet. But, like everyone, I've had my moments.

I don't appreciate violent environments, but I am also comfortable with dealing
with violent individuals. As a consequence I've ended up in various minor fights
over the years. However, in a few incidents I momentarily lost it and hit women.

One time I punched my little sister several times in the stomach. Unfortunately
we weren't kids then. I had been staying with my family for a few weeks and my
mother and sister were making each other quite miserable.

Unfortunately I intervened and it escalated to a point where I momentarily lost
it. And to make things worse, years later, I repeated my shameful loss of
control as an argument with a girlfriend heated up and I hit her.

I can say how she was the aggressor and how she almost destroyed years of my
work, but truth is, I should have maintained control. Alas, there is no rewind
button in life and even a momentary loss of control can't be excused.

At least to make up for my shame, I spent the night in Brixton police station
and got given a caution. She had called the police and despite her not wanting
to press any charges, it seems the police had to take the guy into custody.

Having called the police many times when my father was being excessively violent
towards my mother, I was actually very appreciative of the police action in this
case. However I wasn't too happy with the caution.

Now, a caution isn't a criminal conviction but I felt it to be unjust. She was
clearly the aggressor and whilst I was also in the wrong, I felt the
discrimination based on my sex to be thoroughly unfair.

And to make matters worse, it turns out that if I had simply refused to answer
the questions in the police interview, then I would have walked away with no
caution, but since I had been open and honest, I'd fucked myself.

Justice should be contextual and people should be encouraged to be open and
honest. In any case, like others before me [Gandhi-1927]_, I am not a violent
individual, but I have sadly had moments where I've lost control.


Are you a vegetarian?
=====================

I used to be. Fervently. For 8 years of my life. From August 1998 till
December 2006. I had two rational reasons for my choice:

1. By eating lower down the food chain, it is more efficient and a larger global
   population could be sustained.

2. Life is beautiful. And our fellow creatures shouldn't live purely for our
   sake.

But, whilst I believe in the above, I also love the taste of meat and think that
it is natural to be a meat-eater. So the real reason I gave up meat was because
of a girl. She was a vegetarian.

She was my first love and though she had never asked me to give up meat, I did
so willingly. And the fact that I never touched meat was a sign of my commitment
to her.

But when we broke up in December 2006, I couldn't decide whether I wanted to
stay being a vegetarian or go back to eating meat. So I flipped a coin and am
now a meat-eater again.


Have you taken drugs?
=====================

Yes. I believe that one should experience as much of what life offers. And not
suffering from an addictive personality (nicotine excepted), I have had the
luxury of trying out various drugs.

.. class:: sidebox

  "Hallucinogens helped with my understanding of myself and life"

My favourites have been LSD (Acid), MDMA and magic mushrooms. MDMA truly can be
happiness in a packet. And never having had a bad trip, hallucinogens have truly
helped with my understanding of myself and life around me.

Actually that not having had a bad trip thing isn't quite true. I was at a rave
once tripping my balls off on acid when two girls decided to stalk me. The two
witches as I saw them. It was a pleasant trip after I managed to get rid of
them.

Drugs like cocaine generally have very little effect on me. They just give me a
cold the next day. Some of the designer drugs have been fun -- though their
effects seem to diminish on repeat usage.

And, as for marijuana, whilst I've had many pleasant experiences on it, it is
near the bottom of my drugs list -- along with Ketamine. The reason for this is
because dope makes you comfortable with not doing anything.

I spent a good six months of my life doing nothing but getting stoned every day.
A friend of mine was a total pothead and he would start rolling the next joint
by the time I was finishing smoking the last one. And I really don't enjoy not
being productive.


Have you ever paid for sex?
===========================

No. But I have had a few interesting experiences with prostitutes.

Soho. Crack den

...


Have you been hustled?
======================

Yes, four times.

The first time, I was trying to score some brown (powdered heroin) from a pair
of street dealers. I gave one of them some cash and he owed me a fiver back. He
claimed to not have any change and said he'd pop down to the local shop.

...


Do you have a criminal record?
==============================

No.


What do you have against the Vatican City?
==========================================

Let me be clear that I have nothing against the Vatican. It is the Vatican City
that I have problems with. Specifically, the Gendarmeria -- the police force.

To understand this, we need to go back to one summer night in 2005. I had gone
to Rome for a day meeting. The meeting had gone well and my flight back was
early the next morning. So instead of being cooped up in my hotel room, I
decided to spend the night checking out Rome.

...


How much debt do you have?
==========================

I have lived most of my life assuming a gift economy of sorts. So my actual
legal debt is a £14k loan to Halifax which never seems to go down. However, I
owe just under £200k to friends and family.

The bulk of that is to the investors of my first company. The company went
bankrupt around my 19th birthday and I decided that the honourable thing would
be to assume their lost investment as debt owed to them from me personally.

Whilst this is no doubt a stupid stance to take as legally I owe them nothing
and they knowingly took the risk, I felt that they invested because they
believed in me and therefore it was my responsibility.

However I haven't felt the same sense of duty when dealing with large
corporations and have walked away from an outstanding mobile phone bill with
Vodafone and overdrafts with HSBC and Natwest. Sorry, I was poor.

Besides what I feel I owe to the investors of my first company, I also feel
guilty for a minor debt of around €50 owed to an Indonesian restaurant. It came
about whilst I was a starving artist in Berlin.

I didn't have any money, so I made a deal with the local Turkish and Indonesian
restaurants -- they'd feed me daily and when I got some money, I'd settle my
debt. After a few months of this I eventually settled my debt and all was good.

I asked the Indonesian place if they'd continue the deal and they kindly agreed.
These people were lovely. The owner, Surya, and his wife took great care of me.
However, about a week or so later, tragedy struck.

An uncle of mine died and my mother paid for a flight so that I could get back
for the funeral. Around the same time I was moving from one part of Berlin to
another. And, amidst all the commotion, I completely forgot to pay them.

It wasn't intentional and I'd really like to see the debt paid.


What jobs have you had?
=======================

I have worked for myself (the Espian vision) most of my life. So have had little
chance to have a "normal job".

My first job was working for an uncle of mine in his post-office/corner-shop in
Walthamstow. It was also the longest job I've had (a whole month!). I slept on
the store floor and during occasional bouts of insomnia re-organised the shop
and somehow managed to double the revenue.

My second longest job was as a street cleaner for Islington council. This was
perhaps the best job I've had. I got to get up early in the morning. And work
was finished by noon meaning that I had the whole day left.

Unfortunately, after 2 weeks, my ganger called me in and laid me off. I had been
spending too much time cleaning each and every street. I was laid off for being
a perfectionist. Heh.

Other jobs include being an art salesman, facilitator, etc. The funniest was
being an extra for a Sky Sports rugby ad -- imagine that, skinny me being
portrayed as a rugby player -- friends called up in disbelief after seeing the
ad.

And, finally, there have been a dozen odd temp jobs which I occassionally tried
for a day or two before walking out at the incompetency of those who were meant
to be my managers.


What is the worst invention ever?
=================================

Alarm clocks.

The wooshing sound of deadlines as they fly past.

...


What have you done with your life?
==================================

A lot of different things. Mainly centered around the Espian vision.

...


What do you want to do with rest of your life?
==============================================

A lot. Some of the highlights include:

* Empowering people by creating a better social-economic infrastructure.

* Creating a decentralised social platform. Ampify.

* Crafting a multi-genre musical instrument that inspires people. Jintra.

* Building a city using social architecture and a global underground tube
  network. Zygote & Xetre.

* Creating a movie of epic proportions. Gaia.

* Travelling to Mars. Mangala.

* Utilising advances in molecular biology to enable a higher quality of life for
  all. Electrophyll & Geren.

* Nurturing the cultural and natural commons for the benefit of all. Espia.

* Having a daughter. Hiroko.

Most likely I'll die of something like lung cancer before most of this happens.
So I also want to make the most of every moment that I am alive. Bringing
pleasure to myself and as much of humanity as possible.


What has been your most self-empowering moment yet?
===================================================

It took place sometime during the summer of 2004.

...


What inspires you?
==================

.. image:: http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.saritah.jpg
           :width: 352
           :height: 259
           :align: center
           :class: float-right

| Get up and get going
| You've got nothing to lose
| Let it out, let it through
| There's nothing that you can't do
|
| What you want, get up and get
| Your future hasn't happened yet
| It is up to you to manifest
|
| Participation -- fundamental to creation
| You will not reach your destiny
| If you don't leave the station
| Let yourself be activated visionary
|
| Get up and get going
| You've got nothing to lose
| Let it out, let it through
| There's nothing that you can't do
|
| You are capable -- never forget that
| You are courageous -- got to respect that
| You've got your freedom -- need to protect that
|
| INSPIRATION, MOTIVATION, DEDICATION, REALISATION, YEAH!
|
| -- `Saritah <http://www.saritah.com/>`_


What has been the low point of your life?
=========================================

There have been many low points in my life. Not sure if I could select one as
having been the lowest. But one that springs to mind took place in 2003.

It started with me fucking up a freelance work. I'd been asked to develop the
new abctales.com -- a website for writers from all around the world. It was a
relatively straightforward task, but I decided to develop a lot of advanced
functionality. I had felt abctales could be a key player in the emerging "Web
2.0" space.

But, in so doing, I ended up taking a lot longer than I had originally planned.
I hadn't learnt the art of expectation management at this point. So, after a
month, pretty much everyone was pissed off. Not least, the abctales.com
community.

The guy who ran the thing and had believed in my abilities was tearing his hair
out. The friends who had recommended me to him were fucking pissed off. Someone
decided to steal the front tyre from the bike that I'd gotten from a skip. The
bike that I'd been using since I couldn't pay for public transport.

The "landlord" wasn't too pleased at rent not being paid. Enough was enough he
said. Please leave. And, oh, in the middle of all this, my relationship with a
girlfriend took a turn for the worse.

So I gave my landlord my fancy phone in exchange for rent owed. He gave me the
brick he owned. I packed up my belongings. As I did so, my laptop decided to
die. Besides the phone and a bunch of clothes, it was all I had left.

As I left the space I had called home for the previous year, I felt more lost
than when my father had kicked me out four years before. But I knew more people
by then. So I made two phone calls.

I fare dodged and got myself to Greenwich, where a wonderful guy called John
Lea fixed up my laptop and revived it. I am forever thankful for the kindness he
showed.

Then I made my way up to somewhere near West Hamsptead, where another friend,
Josef Davies-Coates, helped sort out a place for me to stay temporarily. I'd
have to paint the walls but would be indoors. I accepted.

Not the worst place I've stayed, but it wasn't the best either. The flat had
nothing besides floors and walls. No heating. One working power point and a tap
which dribbled cold water.

Beggars can't be choosers, so I set myself up and got to work. I bought myself a
box of cereal with the last pound I had left. I figured I could survive a bit
with just water and bits of cereal.

Then I managed to contract a fever somehow. So I spent my time huddled up on the
floor with a plastic bag stuffed with clothes as a pillow -- getting up to paint
the walls every so often.

Three days later the fever had gone and I was able to spend my time working
again. I forget how exactly I got myself out of this one, but I am thankful to
John and Josef. The kindness of strangers and friends is inspiring.


What has been your strangest experience so far?
===============================================

I've been lucky to have had a lot of crazy, fun experiences in life. They mostly
happened when I was least expecting them. And the strangest one took place one
early spring morning.

My housemates and I had been out all night dancing away at The Key. We returned
home at about 6 in the morning and not feeling sleepy, put on some music. One of
my flatmates picked up the bongo and started playing.

Despite having danced for the previous 8 hours, I still felt an overflow of
energy and kept on dancing. Not having had any drugs, my intake had been limited
to alcohol and cigarettes.

Then, all of a sudden, I felt one of the most powerful orgasms I'd ever felt. It
just took over me mid-dance. It was unlike anything I had ever experienced
before. And, being a non-ejaculatory orgasm, took me a moment to realise what
I'd just experienced.

I finally understood the Melveli (the Sufi Whirling Dervishes). I felt the
connection to the Universe pulsate through me. I offered myself in service to
the whole of creation.


What problem have you struggled the most with?
==============================================

Double binds. Destiny.

...


Why don't you read books?
=========================

Let me be clear. Whilst I rarely read books, I do read. A lot. The reason I
avoid books is for two simple reasons.

The first one is rather ego maniacal. I wanted to be able to claim my ideas as
my own. It was a rather poor reaction to discovering Zeno's paradoxes
[Aristotle]_ when I was a kid.

As a master of procrastination who spent a lot of his life thinking, I am
comfortable claiming my ideas as my own. But as I've grown older, I've come to
realise that nothing stands on its own.

Thus I came to realise that all my thoughts have in some way been inspired by
the works and actions of others around me. Truth is not owned. It can only be
discovered. I am merely a vessel for it to channel through.

The second reason is the one that still makes me avoid books. I noticed at a
young age that "educated" people spoke in a rather funny language. They would
use terms that only a select few would understand.

The terms gave them clarity and precision. But they became lost in it. Unable to
communicate with most others. A great loss in my view. Because they have much to
offer. So I have left it to others to read and simply question them to get an
understanding for myself.


Who are you most thankful for?
==============================

My mother -- Thamilarasi. She has sacrificed much of her life for me. She has
always been caring, attentive and loving.

Even when she joked to my father that should he see a woman running down the
street pulling out her hair in frustration, he should stop and look. For it
might be her -- tired of my never-ending questions. But, even then, she kept
answering my thousands of "Whys?".

She taught me the Arts. The Sciences. Mathematics. Music. History. Linguistics.
Everything she knew she taught me. She encouraged me to have an open mind.

She even got beaten up several times by my father for supporting me. He broke
her nose once because she'd paid £35 to put in my application for GCSE Maths.
Doesn't seem like much now, but we were poor then and she'd starved herself for
weeks to save up.

In some ways, my desire to change the world for the better was largely ingrained
by my mother. She used to have dreams when she was pregnant with me. Dreams of a
sage who would take her on travels across the Universe. Teach her mathematics.
Show her how life could be.

These dreams convinced my mother that I was the one prophesised by our
ancestors. The one who would save his people and make the world a better place.
Whilst I've grown to take it all with a pinch of salt, I cannot deny that it
affected me.

Thank you Amma.


Is it true that you met with the Tamil Tigers? Are you one?
===========================================================

Yes, I have met them. But, no, I am not affiliated with them.

To understand the context we need to go all the way back to the summer of 1998
-- when my 16-year old self was on holiday in India. There I had fallen in love
with this amazing girl, N-. She loved me back. Life was good.

But since I was in England and she was all the way over in India, I adopted a
life of polyamory [Easton-1997]_. My various girlfriends were (surprisingly)
accepting that my heart belonged to this girl in India. And, energised by this
love, I was able to throw myself into my work.

Then, during Christmas 2002, L- walked into my life. She was over on holiday
from Greece. By 2006, she was in love with me. Life was very good! Most of us go
through life never meeting someone who connects on all aspects -- spiritual,
physical, intellectual, emotional -- but here I'd managed to discover two!

But, by the end of 2006, things began to fall apart. Both N- and L- wanted me to
commit to just one of them. Things were also fraught with N- as she also wanted
me to give up various other things, e.g. cigarettes, mdma, &c. We'd been having
a lot of arguments.

So, rather brashly, on December 1st, I broke off the relationship with N-. As
fate would have it -- the very same evening -- L- broke off with me. I had gone
from a high to a low in one day. Never having experienced rejection before
didn't help.

Two weeks later, I turned up in Athens. It wasn't quite the surprise I'd
intended -- one of the side-effects of having public IRC logs which your lovers
are aware of.

Things started well. L- was still "madly in love" with me. But then we decided
to take a trip to Thessaloniki. Four days later, as we took the train back down
to Athens, the relationship was fully over. She now "hated" me.

It was Christmas Day 2006. I picked up my stuff from her house. Checked myself
into a hotel. And booked a flight to Berlin the next day. I did the only thing I
could do -- throw myself into my work.

But the Universe wasn't happy. I'd lost my energy. Even "Love's Cure" [Ovid]_
was of little help. I tried writing various cathartic letters [Tav-2007]_.
Nothing. The unusually high energy levels had been replaced by a boundless low.

I initiated the 2007 iteration of 24 weeks. Nothing. Work failed to offer the
distraction that I needed. When your work is driven by your love of humanity, it
needs to be anchored somehow.

So two weeks into 24 weeks, I abandoned my responsibilities and went to
Barcelona. Not sure how, but it helped. A week later I returned revitalised. My
energy wasn't back yet. But it wasn't in the negative either. I was able to
breathe. To function.

I got back in touch with N-. My energy levels started to ramp up. But, in late
2007, N- got engaged. She was 25. Most of her friends had gotten married by 21.
Her parents had gotten tired of her excuses.

N-'s mother had sacrificed a lot to bring up her children. N- wanted to make her
happy. So she had agreed to the marriage. I was devastated. So, on December
2007, I turned up in Coimbatoire, India.

It was intense. N- claimed that she was happy to get married. Her husband-to-be,
R-, loved her and she loved him. Then, one day, R- and some of his family (about
20 people) came to visit her family.

I felt like Jude when asked to give away his beloved Sue in marriage
[Hardy-1895]_. I managed to detach myself emotionally and be my usual self. R-'s
family even became rather fond of me. Being charismatic has its downsides. And
this was one.

That night, after everyone had left, N- broke down in tears. She didn't love R-.
She still loved me. She had just been angry over the whole L- situation. And
between that and making her mother happy, she had agreed to the marriage.

We talked with R-. Explained the situation to him. Asked him to call the wedding
off. He refused. He was madly in love with N-. She told him that she didn't love
him. He didn't care. She would come to love him after they got married he
claimed. I was baffled.

She tried to call the wedding off. R- retaliated by claiming to commit suicide
if she did any such thing. I talked with her parents and asked for her hand in
marriage. They refused.

I reasoned. I argued. I pleaded. They would hear none of it. They didn't care
that we loved each other. Culture stood in the way. If I married her then her
parents claimed they would commit suicide.

I asked N- to come with me. Only after her mother passed away she said -- till
then she would do what her mother wanted. Even if that meant spending her life
with someone she didn't love.

I couldn't understand it. The mother wanted her daughter to be happy and thus
was making a decision that would make her daughter's life miserable. And the
daughter was willing to have a miserable life in order to make her mother happy.

.. class:: sidebox

  "Decided to disappear from this insane society and be a hermit"

So I decided to disappear from this insane society and be a hermit somewhere in
the Himalayas. Unfortunately N- was able to figure out my intentions and made
sure that I got on the flight back to London.

The flight, however, was a transit flight via Sri Lanka. So I just walked off
the plane in Colombo. My mind was on auto-pilot. I headed north. A series of
buses, military checkpoints and taxis later, I found myself walking through
no-man's land. On the way to the Tamil-tiger controlled region of Sri Lanka
(Tamil Ealam).

It had been an interesting journey in itself. Included a Buddhist monk I'd
befriended who enlightened me to the current state of the civil war between the
Sinhalese-dominated Sri Lankan government and the rebel Tamil Tigers (LTTE).

My British passport had let me off some of the heavy interrogation and body
searches that some of my fellow travellers had been constantly subject to. But
it had still been rather disconcerting having the private contents of my bag
publically emptied for scrutiny at various checkpoints.

I had spoken in English all the way -- paranoid of being mistaken for a Tamil
Tiger sympathiser. An old lady thanked me in Tamil for helping carry some of her
heavy bags of rice across no-man's land. I simply smiled back. We'd reached the
Tamil Ealam immigration control.

A guy came out to greet me as I puffed away on a cigarette. *What was I doing
there?* I wanted to visit my grandparents' house. *Where was I from?* London.
*Did I know any Tamil?* I put on my strongest English Tamil accent and said
"கொஞ்சம் கொஞ்சம்" (a little bit).

A while later he led me to an official handling the paperwork who asked me a
question in Tamil. I stared back blankly. The other guy proceeded to explain
that I didn't know a word of Tamil. I didn't bother correcting him.

...


What is so good about Nutella?
==============================

.. class:: sidebox

  "Brown skin, brown skin, you know I love your brown skin!" [Arie-2001]_

Nutella is simply orgasmic. Mixed with a diet of Fruit & Fibre, one could live
quite healthily. And if Mr. Ferrero has a sexy heir, I would have gladly married
her in exchange for a lifetime supply of Nutella...


How do you justify your large ecological footprint?
===================================================

I don't. I just hope that the quality and positive nature of my work outweighs
the damage caused by my excess footprint.

And as for using air travel, the dozens of Neem trees that I planted as a kid
hopefully help offset that.


What do you hope to achieve with this document?
===============================================

This is intended as a seed in the Valley of Hope. I would really appreciate
similar seeds from everyone reading this. And, together, our seeds will
hopefully flourish into beautiful Espia.

True power lies in the look in the eye of each and every one of us. And if we
can imagine our desired future, there is no power in the 'Verse that can stop
us. Together, we can create the worlds we want.

All thoughts, comments and criticisms are very welcome.


How does someone get in contact with you?
=========================================

Face to face is best! I'm based in London. If that doesn't work for you, then I
would love it if you could use the convey-and-notify approach [Celik-2007]_ and
drop me a link on:

* phone/sms: +44 (0) 7809 569 369
* email/jabber: tav@espians.com
* irc: `#esp on irc.freenode.net <irc://irc.freenode.net/esp>`_
* twitter: `@tav <http://twitter.com/tav>`_
* facebook: `Tav <http://www.facebook.com/asktav>`_
* skype: |skypestatus| `tavespian <skype:addname?name=tavespian>`_

.. |skypestatuss| replace:: Status

.. |skypestatus| image:: http://mystatus.skype.com/smallicon/tavespian
                         :class: absmiddle

References
==========

.. [Arie-2001]

    `Acoustic Soul: Brown Skin
    <http://www.amazon.com/Acoustic-Soul-India-Arie/dp/B00005A1PR>`_

    India.Arie, Motown, March 2001.

.. [Aristotle]

    `Physics (Physicae Auscultationes)
    <http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/physics.html>`_

    Aristotle, 350 BC.

.. [Celik-2007]

    `Communication Protocols <http://tantek.pbwiki.com/CommunicationProtocols>`_

    Tantek Çelik, 2007.

.. [Easton-1997]

    `The Ethical Slut
    <http://www.amazon.com/Ethical-Slut-Infinite-Sexual-Possibilities/dp/1890159018>`_

    Dossie Easton and Catherine A. Liszt, Greenery Press (CA), December 1997

.. [Gandhi-1927]

    `The Story of My Experiments with Truth
    <http://www.amazon.com/Gandhi-Autobiography-Story-Experiments-Truth/dp/0807059099>`_

    Mohandas Karamchand (Mahatma) Gandhi, 1927.

.. [Ginsburgh]

    `Tav: The Seal of Creation <http://www.inner.org/hebleter/tav.htm>`_

    Gal Einai Institute (from the teachings of Rabbi Yitzchak Ginsburgh).

.. [Hardy-1895]

    `Jude The Obscure <http://www.bibliomania.com/0/0/26/57/>`_

    Thomas Hardy, 1895.

.. [Jordan-1990]

    `The Eye of the World
    <http://www.amazon.com/Eye-World-Wheel-Time-Book/dp/0812511816>`_

    Robert Jordan, Tor Fantasy, November 1990.

.. [Ovid]

    `Remedia Amoris (Love's Cure)
    <http://www.sacred-texts.com/cla/ovid/lboo/lboo61.htm>`_

    Publius Ovidius Naso (Ovid), 5 BC.

.. [Palmer-2004]

    `WTF 1: On Espia, Tav, and the Plex <http://infomesh.net/200X/wtf1>`_

    Sean B. Palmer, March 2004.

.. [Tav-2007]

    `A Missive From a Heart to That Thing Sitting on the Shelf
    <http://loves-cure.blogspot.com/2007/02/missive-from-heart-to-that-thing.html>`_

    Tav, February 2007.

