---
created: 2008-07-08, 06:23
layout: post
license: Public Domain
---

==================
Evolution of Ideas
==================

.. image:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/9c/Darwin_ape.jpg
           :alt: Caricature of Charles Darwin
           :class: float-right-aligned
           :width: 200
           :height: 253

Ideas require the right kind of incubation. They need to be nurtured before
being taken into the world -- at the right moment in time.

The nurturing and timing of ideas is one aspect which most innovators and
entrepreneurs seem to miss. And I certainly can't talk about timing -- as the
`tyranny of timing
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_hb1437/is_200201/ai_n5944664>`_ is
something that I've had to learn the hard way.

But I've been extremely lucky with respect to the nurturing of ideas. For
reasons still unknown, extra-ordinary individuals seem to be attracted to me.
And their influences have been pure gold.

This is a reflection of something that I've heard referred to as the "Florence
Effect". That is, whilst statistically speaking we should have millions of
Einsteins and Da Vincis walking amongst us, the reason many of them haven't
tapped into their full potential is due to a lack of a nurturing, vibrant
community.

.. more

In contrast, if you take Florence or Rome during the `High Renaissance
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High_Renaissance>`_, you will see that the likes
of `Leonardo da Vinci <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonardo_da_Vinci>`_,
`Michelangelo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michelangelo>`_, `Raphael
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raphael>`_, `Botticelli
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Botticelli>`_, `Ghirlandaio
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghirlandaio>`_ and `Perugino
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perugino>`_ all hung around the same areas.

Not only would they have influenced, inspired and critiqued each other, but many
of them actively taught some of the others. Their social networks would have
overlapped considerably enough that ideas would have flowed much faster than at
other points in history.

The various localities of Florence and Rome -- with their various patrons --
acted as a positive `echo chamber
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_echo_chamber>`_ within which ideas and
inspirations would have flowed and been nurtured. We need such spaces for the
`cultural creatives <http://www.culturalcreatives.org/>`_ of our times.

For me, the `#esp IRC channel <irc://irc.freenode.net/esp>`_ has been one such
space. And you can see its influence even in the evolution of just two of the
ideas:

* Organisational Model & Pecus
* Gift Economy

For the first employment contract, I wrote (in 1999):

  *The full employees collectively form the “Ecclésia”, and this group owns
  fifty percent of the Company shares. The Ecclésia elects (by the Australian
  ballot) on a quarterly basis an executive council of 7 chief officers. This
  council will decide on company policies on a day-to-day basis, and will put to
  vote before the Ecclésia – matters of serious import. However, any member of
  the Ecclésia may voice their opinion on all matters.*
 
  *Company work will take place over the Company Extranet. The Ecclésia will
  decide on new projects and assign values of their worth, as well as elect the
  Project Leader. It is then up to the Project Leader, to define the Jobs needed
  to be done for the success of the Project, and their respective values in plex
  economic currency units (pecus).*

This later evolved to include trust-based algorithms and certifications -- as
can be seen from this `chat log about the Espian model
<http://web.archive.org/web/20020314184348/http://tav.espians.com/espian_model_chat>`_
in 2001. And on an unrelated front, I was also `rambling on the Espra dev list
<http://web.archive.org/web/20010414190833/lists.espra.net/pipermail/espra-dev/2001-February/000089.html>`_
about gift economies -- also in 2001.

But at that time, these were two separate ideas. But gradual conversations with
others helped identify key problems. And in the iterative refinements I came to
the intuitive realisation that they were somehow two aspects of the same whole.
That there was a simplicity beyond the complexity.

And in my attempt to unify the elements -- through hundreds of conversations --
early last year, I ended up with:

.. raw:: html

  <div class="center">
    <a href="http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.toman-ecology.png" title="Toman Ecology"><img 
       src="http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.toman-ecology.png"
       alt="Toman Ecology"
       width="498px"
       height="361px" /></a>
  </div>

But it was only after yet more criticism and dialogue earlier this year that I
finally ended up with the true essence of the model. What I now call the "Espian
ecology" -- where the initial Pecus I had touched upon and the gift economy are
just two parts of one simple structure.

I'll write an article on it later this month. Until then, what has your
experiences been with regards to the evolution of ideas?