---
created: 2009-03-01, 19:58
layout: post
license: Public Domain
---

================================
Facilitating The Banana Industry
================================

Last year, `Sofia <http://blog.turnupthecourage.com>`_ and I got invited to
facilitate and help set up a Multi-Stakeholder Forum for the Banana industry.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right">
  <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/olasofia/3177879142/in/set-72157612292777564/"><img
  src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3306/3177879142_4eecdcf897.jpg" alt="Tav
  and Sofia facilitating the Multi-Stakeholder Forum" /></a>
  </div>

[Well, technically, she got invited and I tagged along as the co-facilitator --
aka "Slave"]

The hard working guys at `Banana Link <http://www.bananalink.org.uk/>`_ had been
at this for years now. And the seed for it had been set at the `2nd
International Banana Conference <http://www.ibc2.org/>`_.

Our task was to get everyone to talk to each other and commit to being active in
a new body that was representative of all in the industry.

And all this in 3 days.

.. more

So we shipped over a whole bunch of `stationery <http://www.ryman.co.uk/>`_ to
Amsterdam and got there in time to check out the venue before heading to dinner
with all the other participants.

If we had expected this to be easy in any way, the dinner proved without a doubt
that it was going to be an uphill battle. Everyone was pleasant, but there were
quite clearly 2 separate camps:

* The small producers from places like the Philippines, Windward Islands, Costa
  Rica, &c. along with their NGO friendlies like the `Fairtrade Foundation
  <http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/>`_.

* The large producers like `Chiquita <http://www.chiquita.com/>`_, `Dole
  <http://www.dole.com/>`_, &c. who own more than 80% of the Banana export
  industry and their retailer friendlies.

Many of the representatives even went so far as to keep themselves physically
separated across the tables in the restaurant!

But the fact that all these representatives were willing to be here at least was
a good sign. The only class of key players who were notably absent were Big
Retail: `Walmart <http://www.walmart.com/>`_, `Carrefour
<http://www.carrefour.com/>`_ and `Tesco <http://www.tesco.com/>`_.

.. image:: http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3124/3177897284_62477d037b_m.jpg
           :class: float-left

So we set to it and over two days a transformation began to take place. The team
of interpreters bridged the language gaps whilst Sofia and I took everyone
through a bastardised process of `World Caf√© <http://www.theworldcafe.com/>`_,
`Open Space <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Space_Technology>`_ and
`Dotmocracy <http://www.dotmocracy.org/>`_.

And slowly but surely everyone realised that they did in fact share a lot of the
same problems and ideals!

Very quickly after that consensus was reached on the Multi-Stakeholder Forum.
And everyone, including the big players, made their commitments to it!!

We celebrated the success by dancing the night away in Amsterdam and even
managed to hang out with Steve Alexander and his buddies during their `Improv
Theater performance <http://tdams.com/>`_.

The whole experience was great fun and made us want to bring together similar
bodies across all industries! There isn't enough dialogue taking place with real
action behind it.

It was also the first time Sofia and I had worked together just by ourselves in
an external project and we were great together. It turns out that working
together with your girlfriend *can* be loads of fun!

Finally, I found the experience extremely enlightening. It forced me to go on a
crash-course (prior to the event) and learn about the various issues relating to
the Banana industry.

And the issues that the various participants brought up helped re-emphasise to
me that the solutions provided by the Plex Economy are very much needed. Not
just bloggers, musicians and coders -- but entire industries -- are ready for
it!