========================================
Inside Grameen with a Nobel Prize Winner
========================================

:XX-Created: [2009-07-21, 16:57]

Last July I was invited to spend some time at Grameen HQ in `Dhaka
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dhaka>`_. Famous for pioneering the `Microfinance
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microfinance>`_ revolution with `Grameen Bank
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grameen_Bank>`_, the rumours were that big things
were afoot in Bangladesh.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right">
  <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/27973032@N07/2676194227/"><img
  src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3006/2676194227_d17be85516_m.jpg"
  alt="Grameen HQ" /></a><br />
  <div class="image-caption">
    by <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/27973032@N07/2676194227/">leonardgavelle</a>
  </div>
  </div>

  <div class="float-right">
  <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/yodelanecdotal/1879029636/"><img
  src="http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2116/1879029636_f7e618ad2b_m.jpg"
  alt="Muhammad Yunus" /></a><br />
  <div class="image-caption">
    by <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/yodelanecdotal/1879029636/">Yodel Anecdotal</a>
  </div>
  </div>

.. Not only would we hang out with  -- but we'd get to spend time with the other leaders of Grameen!
.. Now the others -- Chris Macrae, Sofia Bustamante, Mark Chaplin and Mostofa
.. Zaman -- had spent time with Dr. Yunus before in New York City, London and elsewhere.

I'd had a chance to briefly meet its founder, the Nobel Peace Prize-winning
`Muhammad Yunus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muhammad_Yunus>`_, at a lunch in
the RAC. But sadly we didn't really to engage in depth.

He had been over to promote `his book
<http://www.amazon.com/Creating-World-Without-Poverty-Capitalism/dp/1586484931>`_
and the time demands on a Nobel laureate are seemingly insane.

The book -- subtitled "Future of Capitalism" -- resonated with some of my own
thinking and I was keen to find out what Dr. Yunus and his compatriots really
thought.

The fact that Grameen Bank managed to become a profitable *multi-billion* dollar
bank by giving small unsecured loans to those in extreme poverty is proof enough
of their capacity to create opportunities. But, from afar, I wondered about
their ability to think in networked/ecological terms.

So with 2 days to go before the time in Dhaka was meant to begin, I joined the
rest of Chris' team. I dubbed them "The Dhaka 5". Flights were booked and visas
sorted in a hurry.

But my main frustration came out of my inability to find any decent books or
podcasts on learning `Bengali (Bangla)
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bengali_language>`_. I generally like to pick up
some basics on native languages as opportunities arise -- but most bookshops
seemed to have non-existant sections dedicated to the 5th most spoken language
in the world!!

I eventually managed to find a "Teach Yourself" guide and listened to YouTube
renditions of `Amar Shonar Bangla
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amar_Shonar_Bangla>`_ and `Bengali film music on
Raaga.com <http://www.raaga.com/channels/bengali/movies.asp>`_ for 30-odd hours
to familiarise myself with the pronounciation. And after speed reading through
the Teach Yourself guides on the plane, we finally arrived in Dhaka.

Some of you may have already read my `first impressions of Dhaka article
<first-impressions-of-dhaka.html>`_, so I'll skip ahead to our first engagement
with Grameen HQ: experiencing the "showcase" Grameen Village.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-left">
  <a href="http://flickr.com/photos/olasofia/2688315970/in/set-72157606270139832"><img
  src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3184/2688315970_2e254f50e8_m.jpg"
  alt="Grameen (Village) Kids" /></a><br />
  <div class="image-caption">
    by <a href="http://flickr.com/photos/olasofia/2688315970/in/set-72157606270139832">olasofia</a>
  </div>
  </div>

The village was everything you'd expect from a showcase piece. The success
stories. The communal feel. The friendly faces. Mark got his camera out and was
filming as I interviewed the village circle. It started with the things we
already knew -- mostly women borrowers, high rates of loan repayments, etc. --
and gradually moved into new territory.

It became apparent that Grameen is a traditional `command and control
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_and_control_(military)>`_ structured
organisation. The circle leader reports to the ... leader who reports to the
regional leader who reports to the ... leader who ... and so on.

I wasn't too impressed by that, but to make up for it Grameen seemed to enforce
certain positive values. For example, if Grameen Bank gives you a loan, then you
*must* have your kids in school. And you *must* save a certain amount regularly.

The beauty of this is that this is a voluntary system. There is nothing forcing
anyone to get a loan from Grameen. And by designing in systemic benefits,
Grameen encourage social benefits without needing regulation or approval from
the government in any way!


.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-left">
  <a href="http://flickr.com/photos/olasofia/2688321690/in/set-72157606270139832/"><img
  src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3246/2688321690_b65b1713af_m.jpg"
  alt="Grameen Shakti Entrance" /></a><br />
  <div class="image-caption">
    by <a href="http://flickr.com/photos/olasofia/2688321690/in/set-72157606270139832/">olasofia</a>
  </div>
  </div>

Future Capitalism

Social Businesses

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right">
  <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/asktav/2681539094/" title="Dhaka 5 With Yunus @ Grameen HQ by asktav, on Flickr"><img src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3103/2681539094_7f705237e7.jpg" width="500" height="433" alt="Dhaka 5 With Yunus @ Grameen HQ" /></a>
  </div>

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right">
  <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/asktav/2681606134/" title="Hotel Lobby -- Mark &amp; Tav by asktav, on Flickr"><img src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3064/2681606134_882f6e0824.jpg" width="350" height="262" alt="Hotel Lobby -- Mark &amp; Tav" /></a>
  </div>

Interns.

Mostofa.

CEO of Grameen Solutions.

Grameen Trust.

.. raw:: html

  <hr class="clear" />

http://www.copperwiki.org/index.php/Grameen_Bank

http://flickr.com/photos/olasofia/sets/72157606270139832/