===========
Iteration X
===========

It's Going To Be Awesome!
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:X-Created: [2009-06-02, 19:00]
:X-Type:    Page
:Abstract:

    This document provides a brief overview of Iteration X. Starting on June
    |2nd| 2009, this Iteration will focus on the creation of:

    1. Plexnet -- A Set of Open Web Standards for a Decentralised App Platform.

    2. Plex Economy -- Capitalism 4.0 built around Common Economic Protocols.

    3. Plexverse -- Better Living through a Plex Apps enabled Social Movement.

    A pseudo-prototype called TweetPlex will also be created during the first month.

    Feel free to join in and enjoy the ride!

.. |2nd| raw:: html

  2<sup>nd</sup>

.. raw:: html

  <style type="text/css">
    sup { display: inline }
  </style>

.. more

.. contents::   Table of Contents
                :depth: 2
                :backlinks: none


Vision
======

Iteration X is about enabling the Espian Vision and making it possible. The
vision is simply an answer to the three questions:

1. How can we all live comfortably and be doing what we love?

2. How can we efficiently organise people, ideas and resources?

3. How can we be united in our diversity so that culture truly flourishes?

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right">
    <img src="http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.web-4.0.cover.png"
         width="511px" height="382px" />
  </div>

Iteration X will enable this vision by the creation of a parallel public
infrastructure -- a socio-economic-technological platform catering to the needs
of humanity.

In short, creating weapons of mass construction.

The tagline for the Iteration captures the intent well -- Web 4.0. A Web 4 the
people by the people.


Operational Overview
====================

The core development will last for a period of 10 months:

.. image:: http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.iteration-x.schedule.png
           :class: float-right
           :width: 750
           :height: 434

As can be seen there will be 2 parallel lines of development starting at the
same time:

* TweetPlex
* Plexnet [Alpha -> Beta -> Final]

Whilst the Plexnet will be the true realisation of the vision, TweetPlex will be
a pseudo-prototype implemented on top of `Google App Engine
<http://code.google.com/appengine/>`_ and will perform the dual roles of:

* Demonstrating the ideas (especially Trust Maps, Pecus and Dolumns)

* Facilitating the project co-ordination and development

It will leverage the excellent work already done by `James Arthur
<http://www.thruflo.com>`_ on `Plexnet Trustmap <http://trustmap.plexnet.org/>`_
and tie it together with an implementation of an extended version of the
`Bootstrap specification <http://tav.espians.com/espra-bootstrap.html>`_
(without the user services part).

.. raw:: html

  <div class="center">
    <img
      src="http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.tweetplex.screen.png" />
  </div>

TweetPlex will be start out as closed source and will be developed at:

* https://github.com/tav/tweetplex/

In contrast, the Plexnet will start out as open source (public domain) and will
be developed at:

* http://github.com/tav/plexnet/

During the first month, the Plexnet development will be focused on writing up
clear specifications/tests and writing stub code for a base layout. The
following months will then be about making it actually work =)

Development will be co-ordinated over to TweetPlex as soon as it's ready, but to
start with it will be done over IRC:

* irc://irc.freenode.net/esp

* `IRC Chat Logs <http://www.openideaproject.org/irclogs/browse/esp/latest>`_

* `Web-based login to IRC
  <http://widget.mibbit.com/?settings=a9ce64f72c4eca104beb464a3b939953&server=irc.freenode.net&channel=%23esp>`_

The launch of `Plexnet.org <http://www.plexnet.org>`_ with finalised specs and
`TweetPlex <http://www.tweetplex.com>`_ -- sometime during the course of July --
will be accompanied by a Fundraiser which will follow two complementary paths:

* Peer Funding
* VC Funding

The Peer Funding will be kicked off by a video that will act as a call to arms
for `cultural creatives <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cultural_Creatives>`_
(developers, writers, musicians, designers, film-makers, architects, lawyers,
etc.) and invite them to join in a 10-month journey.

The invitation will be limited to 60,000 people (30,000 men and 30,000 women)
who, in exchange for paying £10/month for 10 months, will get:

.. image:: http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.plexnet.radical.png
           :class: float-right

* Access to TweetPlex with a reasonably sized quota.

* Front-row seats to capitalise on the opportunities that will be provided by
  the Plex.

* A chance to be one of the 6,000 members of the Ecclesia (half of whom will be
  chosen by lottery and the other half by election).

The VC Funding route will, in contrast, seek a lump sum investment of £5 million
from a number of VC Firms -- some of whom we are already in contact with.

In both cases, Tav-branded Pecus will be provided in place of traditional
`shares-based equity <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock>`_ -- with the Peer
Funders getting a bit more Pecus per Pound Sterling.

The funds will be used for:

.. raw:: html

  <div class="center">
    <img
      src="http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.iteration-x.budget.png"
      width="468px" height="451px" />
  </div>

Which will allow us to have an ideal team of the following size and form:

.. raw:: html

  <div class="center">
    <img
      src="http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.iteration-x.people.month4.png"
      width="503px" height="366px" />
  </div>



Rules of Engagement
===================

The development of the Plexnet is totally open for everyone to join in -- just
like in any open source project.

All Contributors will have to agree to the following Public Domain dedication:

* http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ [Make sure to read it!]

In addition, Contributors will also have to waive any claims relating to
trademark and patent rights relating to their Contributions.

And, finally, similar to how Guido van Rossum is the `BDFL
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benevolent_Dictator_For_Life>`_ (Benevolent
Dictator for Life) of the Python project, thus `Tav <http://tav.espians.com>`_
will be for this initiative. If you do not like this, then simply don't join in
and/or feel free to fork the code.

James Arthur (`@thruflo <http://www.thruflo.com>`_) will be the operational lead
for the initiative with `@jeffarch <http://twitter.com/jeffarch>`_ as the glue
that binds everyone together.

Those considered "Core" by James will be rewarded post-fundraiser with:

* A base rate of £2,780/month pro-rata.
* Bonuses paid out roughly every 2 months according to Pecu allocations by Tav.

The initial set of `Pecu allocations by Tav <pecu-allocations-by-tav.html>`_
will be updated with a version on TweetPlex once it's ready.

The whole process will be co-ordinated by Metanational Commons Ltd. -- a private
limited company incorporated in Engalnd & Wales -- Company No. 6834341 with Tav
and Sofia as the legal Director and Secretary respectively:

.. raw:: html

  <div class="center">
    <img src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3306/3177879142_4eecdcf897.jpg" />
  </div>


Revenue Streams
===============

.. image:: http://cloud.github.com/downloads/tav/plexnet/gfx.beyond-the-crunch.cover.png
           :class: float-right
           :width: 511
           :height: 383

It's no secret that the global economy is totally screwed, so one will be
forgiven for wondering how money will be made from the Plex.

In fact, not only is the intent of this whole venture to be very profitable, but
it is intended as a way to take the entire Global Economy beyond the crunch.

With the Plexnet removing technological complexities and inefficiencies, the
Plex Economy bringing together gift/eco/reputation economies, and the Plexverse
enabling decentralised collaboration on a level never before possible in the
history of humanity, we shall all be able to `Run, Dance and Frolic
<http://inamidst.com/stuff/esp/lexicon#r>`_!

There will be several opportunities to capitalise on the Plex, but we will be
focusing on just 3 streams to start with:

1. **Hosted Plexnet Nodes**. Just like one can run open source Web Servers,
   users will be able to run Plexnet Nodes wherever they wish. But for those
   wanting a hosted Node, we shall provide a premium quality version which will
   benefit from low latency connectivity to the other nodes hosted with us.

2. **Pecu Payout Transaction Fee**. We will be charging a 1% surchage in
   addition to paypal/banking/credit card fees for Pecu payout transactions.
   Given the amount of cash flow we'll be dealing with here, it might make sense
   to become a bank and save users the bank fees.

3. **Plexmail Introductory Fees**. Users will be able to set a price for
   receiving messages from those not in their Trust Map. We will be charging an
   additional 30% on top of this.

Not all of this revenue would be profit as we would also have to use some of it
to subsidise:

* Commons Data Hosting -- A bi-weekly generated set of Commons Data from Trust
  Maps generated with the Ecclesia as the "seed".

* Plexnet Event Routing -- A free service offering free event storage/routing
  (matching minimal patterns and up to certain limits) for all Plexnet Nodes.

