---
created: 2008-07-17, 20:15
layout: post
license: Public Domain
---

=======================
Mile High Club: A HowTo
=======================

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right-aligned">
  <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/wongjunhao/2684581600/"><img
     src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3076/2684581600_acbec922a9.jpg"
     alt="Singapore Airline Girl" /></a><br />
  <div class="image-caption">
    by <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/wongjunhao/2684581600/">xcode</a>
  </div>
  </div>

On the British Airways flight back to London I didn't notice a single attractive
air hostess. A sharp contrast to the last long haul airline I had flown with --
Sri Lankan Airlines.

Call me old fashioned. Call me shallow. But air hostesses should be pleasing to
the eye. It's amazing how pleasant a little `eye candy
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_appeal>`_ can be. Makes those 9 hours fly
by a lot quicker.

As for the in-flight movies -- finding one that won't send you to sleep is a bit
like winning the lottery. Good luck.

Of course sleep isn't too bad as far as entertainment goes. But, hopefully, none
of you need any help with that. This post is instead about the `Mile High Club
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mile_high_club>`_ -- something which isn't as
commonplace as I once imagined.

The Mile High Club is simply about having sex in an airplane. It's a thrill and
a half -- and by far the best entertainment on long haul flights.

When I was young I had presumed that this privilege was limited to flights in
private jets, but with experience I can state that commercial flights are also
good game.

Execution is generally dependent on who happens to be sitting next to you. But
you don't need to leave this to chance. After all, luck is simply the meeting
point between preparation and opportunity.

.. more

So how do you increase your chances? How do you ensure that you DON'T have a
`minger <http://www.mingers.com/>`_ sitting right next to you? The obvious is to
have your girlfriend/boyfriend travelling with you. Failing that you need to do
a little bit of work during check-in.

Start by identifying someone suitable. Then get yourself next in line to them
and take advantage of the long check-in times to start seducing them. There's
something about airports that makes people very open.

You then want to casually suggest that you both get your seats next to each
other so that you can carry on with the conversation in-flight and pass time
pleasantly. If you are at all engaging, this is very easy. I've had a 100%
success rate in getting new friends to sit next to me on fights.

Once you are both checked-in, you want to make yourself scarce for a little bit
of time. A little separation only adds to the excitement.

Once you are on-board, continue with the conversation. Start discovering each
other. Be patient and gradually increase the seduction by a few notches. Take
advantage of the physical proximity for casual tactile contact and introduce
sexual imagery into your conversation. Be classy.

Talk about the Mile High Club and gradually convince them of the idea. It is
after all, a great experience! For those not skilled in seduction, the key is to
simply be genuine, relaxed and have your breathing in sync with the other
person.

Now comes the tricky part -- assuming the other person is interested and
sexually excited -- timing.

You need to choose a time when both the queues and turbulence are minimal so
that the cabin crew don't come and disturb your time in the only place for
privacy -- the toilet.

Unless you are on a private jet or can wing true privacy, only be sexual inside
a toilet. The thrill of getting caught adds to the excitement, but don't be
`stupid like this pair <http://www.shortnews.com/start.cfm?id=67632>`_!

You and your new friend now need to subtly get into the same toilet together.
Don't worry about the entry too much -- it's the exit that's a problem. And
assuming the chemistry is great and that you are well prepared, you should both
have a great time -- feel the love!

Once the enjoyment has been had though, you now need to get out and face your
fellow passengers who have been waiting in line for a while -- or perhaps even
cabin crew...

One trick is to get the other person to pretend to be slightly ill. And then you
can "help" them as you get back to your seats. It immediately suggests to anyone
suspicious that nothing untoward has been happening. Your post-orgasmic bliss
can continue uninterrupted!

Once back in your seats, continue as before -- who knows, you might find the
love of your life this way. Or if not, you'll at least make a few good friends.

I hope this how-to has been useful in some way. Let me know in the comments how
your experiences go. And, please, be respectful to the sensibilities of your
fellow passengers -- there might be children and nuns on board.