---
created: 2009-03-11, 21:55
layout: post
license: Public Domain
---

=======================================
Say No to Google's Intrusion of Privacy
=======================================

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right">
    <img
    src="http://brucewagner.files.wordpress.com/2008/02/boycott_google_logo.jpg"
    alt ="Boycott Google" /><br />
    <div class="image-caption">by <a href="http://brucewagner.wordpress.com">Bruce
    Wagner</a></div>
  </div>

*[Blog, Twitter #googlestrike and Facebook this as much as you can -- Thanks!]*

**This is a call to boycott Google AdSense until they change their new
monitoring policy to be opt-in.**

Earlier today, Google announced that they will be `monitoring everybody's online
activity <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/7937201.stm>`_. This is clearly
a violation of their "Don't Be Evil" policy.

In their quest to serve more targeted ads, Google will now start tracking the
sites that we all visit. They can do this because a lot of sites use Google
`AdSense <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AdSense>`_.

And every time we visit these sites running AdSense, Google will know exactly
where we've been. This is an extreme breach of privacy! We must act now or risk
handing over our privacy permanently.

.. more

So this is a call to all network admins -- in homes, offices, university
campuses, ISPs and anywhere else -- to please add the following 2 lines to your
`hosts file <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hosts_file>`_::

  127.0.0.1   pagead2.googlesyndication.com
  127.0.0.1   googlesyndication.com

If you are not an admin, then get in touch with whoever runs your local
home/office/ISP/university networks and get them to make the change.

By doing this, you will disable Google's tracking as well as take away their
revenue -- an online equivalent of boycotting. If it is not made clear that our
privacy is important, the rest of the industry will simply follow Google's lead
even further.

So when should we stop boycotting Google AdSense? When they make it **opt-in**
instead of the current opt-out they provide on their `ad preferences
<http://www.google.com/ads/preferences/>`_ page.

.. class:: sidebox

  It's like having an invisible spy camera following you around

The problem with opt-out is that most users simply don't understand the
technical details. As Tim Berners-Lee points out it's like having an `invisible
spy camera
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/scienceandtechnology/technology/technologynews/4974695/Online-privacy-demanded-by-web-founders.html>`_
following you around.

Most people simply don't even know that it's there! And worse, with Google's
current implementation, you have to opt-out from every browser and machine you
ever use!! This is outrageous!

If Google would make this opt-in on the other hand, I will happily let them know
what my interests are so that they can serve me more relevant ads. There is
value in `behavioural targetting
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavioral_targeting>`_ and Google can derive the
same value without having to intrude on our privacy.

But letting Google know my interests is one thing and letting them know every
website that I ever visit is a different matter altogether. For that, if some
users want to help Google, then fine, let them do so and let them opt-in.

Countries like France are already planning to take away net neutrality -- with
their upcoming `anti-P2P law
<http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2009/03/french-anti-p2p-law-toughest-in-the-world.ars>`_,
illegal filesharers will be denied internet access for up to a year and open
Wi-Fi hotspots will only be allowed to give access to whitelisted sites.

With unhealthy legislation/censorship like this being forced upon the world, we
really don't need Google adding to our pains and taking away what little privacy
we have left.

I'll update this blog article if/when Google do reverse their policy to opt-in.
Keep it bookmarked so that you can stop the boycott =)

Please comment, blog, twitter `#googlestrike
<http://search.twitter.com/search?q=%23googlestrike>`_ and facebook this as much
as you can -- Thanks!
