=================
Thoughts of Ibiza
=================

:X-Created: [2009-03-10, 17:17]

It was Athini's birthday last week, and my thoughts drifted to the time we all
spent together in `Ibiza <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ibiza>`_ last year.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="float-right">
  <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/olasofia/3319107592/"><img
  src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3612/3319107592_8423d88317.jpg"
  width="400px" height="300px"
  alt="Sky,Tav and Sofia in Ibiza" /></a>
  </div>

Athini is `Sofia's <http://blog.turnupthecourage.com>`_ sister and was our host
when we decided to spend a month away in Ibiza. She's been living there for a
few years now and made our stay super nice.

Leo, the father of her adorable 3-year old Sky, picked us up from the airport
and dropped us off at `Casita Verde <http://www.casitaverde.com>`_ where she was
teaching `Tai chi <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tai_chi_chuan>`_.

Casita Verde was everything that I had not expected from Ibiza.

It turns out that there is more to the island of Eivissa than the clubbing
scenes that we're familiar with. Seemingly limited to the "English" part of the
island where fat girls walk around semi-naked, the rest of the island is rather
tranquil and magical.

Casita Verde itself is an interesting eco-centre situated in a beautiful valley.
The people who gathered there were very interesting to talk to and the organic
meals they served were delicious!!

And as luck would have it, the DJ was playing music by my old housemate `Saritah
<http://www.saritah.com/>`_ which endeared myself to the place even more.

After hanging around there for a while, Athini took us to her home. She'd
managed to find a villa for us to stay that was only a few minutes drive from
her house -- we were going to be neighbours for a month!

The `Can Paloma Villa <http://www.canxerra.de/>`_, owned by an eccentric German
artist called `Eckhard Neumann <http://www.digitalartweb.net/>`_, was absolutely
gorgeous!

.. image:: http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3641/3349031709_cd32c710cb.jpg
           :class: float-left
           :width: 400
           :height: 300

Normally rented out to groups of a dozen-odd people, Sofia and I had the whole
place to ourselves. And thanks to visiting off-season, it cost less than the
rent for our tiny flat in the UK!

Over the next month, Sofia and I worked away on our laptops -- disconnected from
the rest of the world and the internet.

Athini, Leo and little Sky gave us great company which stopped us going insane
from cabin fever. And the visits from Ecki and Schnusch (his cute dog) were an
absolute delight.

But it wasn't all hunky dory. I managed to fall ill with some chest infection
and had to be nursed back to good health by Sofia. Alright, alright, this was
actually really nice ;p

But it turned out that the inhabitants of Ibiza are in a really bad shape
economically. Being way-too-dependent on tourism, the finances of everyone is
cyclical -- great in the summer, crap in the winter.

Clubs like `Pacha <http://www.pacha.com/>`_ were dead even though they had a lot
of space for interesting things to happen. Talented people were sitting at home
without jobs or money.

This is quite a sorry state and reflective of the global economy as a whole.
Fundamentally, we do not lack the resources or man-power to make things viable.
It's simply a question of whether we can co-ordinate them effectively.

And I think Ibiza provides an excellent opportunity for such a venture to be
attempted. If the collective resources and talent could be applied effectively,
there is nothing stopping the inhabitants of Ibiza from being able to have an
extremely high quality of life all year round.

Mamading's article on `Local Community Economics for Security in an Unstable
World
<http://evangineer.agoraworx.com/blog/2009-02-17-local-community-economics-for-security-in-an-unstable-world.html>`_
(`Spanish version
<http://evangineer.agoraworx.com/blog/2009-02-17-economia-local.html>`_) is an
interesting read in this regard.

Who'd be interested in making this happen? Let me know!