---
created: 2011-06-07, 13:54
layout: post
license: Public Domain
---

===================================
Why Bitcoin Will Fail As A Currency
===================================

`Bitcoin mania <http://www.google.com/trends?q=bitcoin>`_ has now reached such
worrying heights that some people are even putting `all of their savings into it
<http://falkvinge.net/2011/05/29/why-im-putting-all-my-savings-into-bitcoin/>`_.
Unfortunately, Bitcoin is fundamentally flawed and by the time you finish
reading this article, I hope you will agree with me.

For those of you not familiar with `Bitcoin <http://www.bitcoin.org/>`_, it is
often described as a "peer-to-peer currency". This geeky video is sorta
informative:

.. raw:: html

  <div class="center">
    <iframe width="560" height="349" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/XQPSwA2Itbs?start=2516" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>

There are a lot of good reasons to be excited about the `design behind Bitcoin
<http://www.bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf>`_ -- it enables secure transactions in a
transparent manner and doesn't require centralised authorities. It really is
genius and I look forward to seeing it used in other domains.

However, this does not make Bitcoin a suitable currency system.

.. more

**Why?**

Because, by design, there will never be more than `21 million Bitcoins
<https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/FAQ#How_are_new_Bitcoins_created?>`_ in existence.
And thanks to hoarding and attrition, we can be sure that it will eventually
serve as nothing more than as a `collector's item
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collectable>`_.

**Bitcoin Hoarding**

First, let's take a look at why Bitcoin encourages hoarding. As I write this,
the `current total <http://blockexplorer.com/q/totalbc>`_ of Bitcoins mined so
far is just short of 6.5 million:

.. syntax:: pycon

  >>> bitcoin.currentTotal()
  6459900

That is, nearly a third of all Bitcoins that could ever exist are already
sitting on people's computers. Now let's assume for a moment that Bitcoin really
is useful and in the next decade grows to an `economy the size of Mexico
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy_of_Mexico>`_, i.e. a trillion dollars.

In this context, if you had 50 Bitcoins they would be worth:

.. syntax:: pycon

  >>> (50. / 21000000) * 1000000000000
  2380952.3809523806

That is, 50 Bitcoins would be worth over 2 million dollars!! Knowing this,
unless you were super desperate, would you really spend those Bitcoins today?

In the early days, when Bitcoin was just a fun experiment, it might have made
sense to spend it. But given that people are `now willing <https://mtgox.com/>`_
to `accept it as a currency <https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Trade>`_, you would be
an idiot not to hoard it.

And, unlike currencies `backed by gold
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gold_standard>`_ or oil, where there is always the
chance of someone discovering new gold mines or `oil fields
<http://www.ogj.com/index/article-display/8070349727/articles/oil-gas-journal/exploration-development-2/area-drilling/20100/june-2011/uganda_-tullow_wells.html>`_,
you know for certain that no-one will ever be able to dilute your share of the
total Bitcoin.

Now, despite the hoarders, there will still be an initial spike in the demand
for Bitcoins due to:

* Non-hoarders experimenting with the system and unwittingly increasing the
  value of the Bitcoins held by the hoarders.

* Greedy hoarders trying to buy up as much Bitcoins as they can so as to
  increase the size of their potential future wealth.

* Scammers manipulating the market with trades so as to make a quick buck from
  `greater fools <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greater_fool_theory>`_ before it
  all comes crashing down.

Unfortunately it won't last long. For starters, the non-hoarders (the actual
spenders) will gradually discover that hoarding is the best strategy for
maximising the value of their Bitcoins -- causing them to either abandon the
system or start hoarding themselves.

It would also become increasingly apparent that the majority are hoarding and
that only a `fraction of Bitcoins are in actual circulation
<https://forum.bitcoin.org/index.php?topic=9456.0>`_. At this point, it is
effectively game over for Bitcoin as a currency. An economy really can't
function if nobody spends any money!!

Since there will be a slow trickle of new users and cautious hoarders gradually
dumping some of their Bitcoins, I doubt the Bitcoin economy will come to a total
standstill anytime soon. But there is no doubt that the majority of the activity
will be driven by speculation.

It should hopefully now be obvious that Bitcoin is simply a store of speculative
value. In some ways, it's a lot like `publicly traded shares
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Share_(finance)>`_. But it's worse, because at
least with most shares you get a share of the underlying corporate assets and
profits.

Also, unlike shares, where you can generally expect recurring `speculative
bubbles <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_bubble>`_, Bitcoin is not
impacted in positive ways by underlying conditions, e.g. corporate acquisitions,
new share issues, growing profits, etc. Thus the capacity for multiple Bitcoin
bubbles is extremely low.

If anything, potential changes in external factors pretty much all lead to a
negative impact for Bitcoin speculators, e.g. financial regulation,
technological breakthroughs, forked block chains, etc.

**Bitcoin Attrition**

The effect of hoarding is made worse by the inevitable attrition of the number
of available Bitcoins. That is, as time goes by, there will be fewer Bitcoins
available in proportion to the total number of Bitcoins.

This happens for a variety of reasons:

* Many users, especially early-adopters, having experimented with Bitcoin and
  generated some coins, have then just forgotten about it.

* You can't access your Bitcoins unless you have your private keys backed up
  somewhere. Hundreds of people have failed to backup their wallets and have
  lost these keys permanently.

* Technical issues in how the client generated keys has led to users losing
  Bitcoins even when they tried to backup properly, e.g. `these
  <http://forum.bitcoin.org/index.php?topic=11104.0>`_ `two
  <http://forum.bitcoin.org/index.php?topic=782.0>`_ have each lost what would
  today be worth about $130k and $160k due to technical glitches. Ouch!

If it were possible to determine it, I would be willing to bet that over a sixth
of the Bitcoins mined thus far are already not accessible. In our hypothetical
scenario above, that would translate to over 50 billion dollars worth that has
simply been "lost".

As time goes by, this figure is only guaranteed to increase. And since we can
safely assume that hoarders will be a lot more careful than the experimenters,
most of the attrition will likely come from the actual spenders in the economy.

Thus, limiting the actual number of Bitcoins in active circulation even further!
I could go on, but I hope the point is relatively clear. Hoarding and attrition
make Bitcoin unsuitable as a currency. Now, let's look at some
counter-arguments.

**What about creating new block chains without the 21 million coin limit?**

Yes, you could create new block chains, EuroCoin, ChinaCoin, etc. However, this
would be not be fixing the problem with Bitcoin in any way. You would simply be
introducing competing alternative systems which may or may not fix the
fundamental issue.

**What about extending the Bitcoin client to keep on issuing new Bitcoins?**

I don't think you could keep on calling this Bitcoin. For starters, it violates
what most people understand as Bitcoin -- that it is totally decentralised and
cannot be controlled by any one party.

By imposing such a fundamental change, you would be violating the core
assumptions made by those who have invested in Bitcoins. I doubt most of the
anti-gov folk who seem to have taken to Bitcoin would be interested in having
such changes dictated to them.

**What about using consensus to change the protocol?**

This is super easy to say and almost impossible to achieve. How would you
achieve this consensus? Would it be majority/mob rule? By lottery? What about
those who disagree with the result? Who decides on the process?

I fear that the opportunity to fix this has long since gone. If anything, future
decentralised currency designers should take this as a lesson to specify, ahead
of time, a process to use in order to make protocol changes.

That way, beneficial changes can be made without violating any implicit
assumptions that people might have made.

**Conclusion**

Bitcoin is not a viable currency. It is a store of speculative value -- much
like investing in stamps, comic books and vintage shoes. The fixed limit of the
number of Bitcoins is subject to attrition and encourages hoarding which will
inevitably lead to mainly speculative activity.

Whilst Bitcoin is a perfectly viable speculative instrument, it will be far too
volatile to serve as a medium of exchange. I would like to call upon the Bitcoin
community to stop referring to it as a digital currency. This is misleading and
harmful.

Finally, forgive me if I haven't been clear enough with any of the explanations
and do let me know what you think.

-- Thanks, tav
